docs:#606 partition assignment with kafka api (#1212)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-balancing.mdx

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Cluster balancing | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="For balanced clusters, Redpanda provide leadership balancing and partition balancing by default. It also supports partition assignment with the Kafka API."/>
</head>

> When a topic is created, Redpanda evenly distributes its partitions by sequentially allocating them to the broker with the least number of partitions. By default, Redpanda provides leadership balancing and partition rebalancing when brokers are added or decommissioned. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a topic is created, Redpanda evenly distributes its partitions by sequentially allocating them to the cluster broker (node) with the least number of partitions. By default, Redpanda provides leadership balancing and partition rebalancing when brokers are added or decommissioned. 
```

Cluster balancing protects you from unbalanced systems that saturate resources on one or more brokers. This can affect throughput and latency. Furthermore, a cluster with replicas on a down broker risks availability loss if more brokers fail, and a cluster that keeps losing brokers without healing eventually risks data loss.

## Leadership balancing

Automatic leadership balancing improves cluster performance by transferring leadership for a broker's partitions to other replicas. Leadership balancing is enabled by default with the `enable_leader_balancer` property. Automatic leadership balancing changes where data is read to and written to first. It doesn't move any data. For more information, see [Partition leadership elections](../../../get-started/architecture/#partition-leadership-elections).

## Redpanda partition balancing

> Partition balancing moves data from hot-loaded brokers to least-loaded brokers to ensure steady-state performance. It ensures predictable and even performance across all brokers in a cluster. Partition balancing is invoked periodically, determined by the `partition_autobalancing_tick_interval_ms` property. Default is 30 seconds.

Reviewer: Is `hot-loaded` common terminology to our users? It's new to me.

```suggestion
Partition balancing moves data from most-loaded brokers to least-loaded brokers to ensure steady-state performance. It ensures predictable and stable performance across all brokers in a cluster. Partition balancing is invoked periodically, determined by the `partition_autobalancing_tick_interval_ms` property. Default is 30 seconds.
```

By default, Redpanda rebalances partition distribution when brokers are added or decommissioned. Continuous Data Balancing additionally rebalances partitions when brokers become unavailable or when disk space usage exceeds a threshold. 

* Monitoring unavailable brokers lets Redpanda self-heal clusters by moving partitions from a failed broker to a healthy broker.
* Monitoring low disk space lets Redpanda distribute partitions across brokers with enough disk space. If free disk space reaches a critically low level, Redpanda blocks clients from producing. For information about the disk space threshold and alert, see [Handle full disks](../disk-utilization/#handle-full-disks).

### Partition balancing settings

Select your partition balancing setting with the `partition_autobalancing_mode` property. 

| Setting      | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |

> | `node_add`      | Partition balancing happens when brokers are added.  <br /><br />This is the default setting.|

Reviewer: Because our properties use `node` instead of `brokers`, we can add clarification that node == broker for each property description, like here, and also at the top of the section.

```suggestion
| `node_add`      | Partition balancing happens when brokers (nodes) are added.  <br /><br />This is the default setting.|
```

| `off`     | All partition balancing from Redpanda is turned off. <br /><br />This mode is not recommended for production clusters. Only set to `off` if you need to move partitions manually.   |

## Partition balancing with Kafka API

As an alternative to Redpanda partition balancing, you can change partition assignments explicitly with the Kafka API or with any 3rd-party tool in the Kafka ecosystem that controls partition movement using the Kafka API. 

To reassign partitions with the Kafka API:

1. Set the `partition_autobalancing_mode` property to `off`. If Redpanda partition balancing is enabled, Redpanda may change partition assignments regardless of what you do through the Kafka API.

2. Show initial replica sets. For example, for topic `foo`:
  ```bash
  rpk topic describe foo -p
  PARTITION  LEADER  EPOCH  REPLICAS  LOG-START-OFFSET  HIGH-WATERMARK
  0          1       1      [1 2 3]   0                 645
  1          1       1      [0 1 2]   0                 682
  2          3       1      [0 1 3]   0                 672
  ```

> 3. Put all partition reassignments in a JSON file. For example, to replace broker 0 with another broker in the replica sets of partitions 1 and 2:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Put all partition reassignments in a JSON file. For example, with broker 0 currently replicating partitions 1 and 2, to replace broker 0 with brokers 3 and 2 in the replica sets of partitions 1 and 2, respectively:
```

Reviewer 2: @shorgi I think that is a little confusing as well.

Would this be more clear?
```suggestion
3. Put all partition reassignments in a JSON file. For example, change the replica set of partition 1 from `[0 1 2]` to `[3 1 2]` and change the replica set of partition 2 from `[0 1 3]` to `[2 1 3]`.
```

  ```

1. Verify that the reassignment is complete with the flag `--preserve-throttles`: 

  ```bash
  kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --verify --preserve-throttles
  Status of partition reassignment:
  Reassignment of partition foo-1 is complete.
  Reassignment of partition foo-2 is complete.
  ```

  Alternatively, run `rpk` again to show your reassigned replica sets:

  ```bash
  rpk topic describe foo -p
  PARTITION  LEADER  EPOCH  REPLICAS  LOG-START-OFFSET  HIGH-WATERMARK
  0          3       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  1          2       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  2          2       1      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  ```  

### Differences in partition balancing between Redpanda and Kafka

- Kafka comes with a shell script to issue partition reassignments: `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh`. This script attempts to use throttle configurations that Redpanda does not support, such as `replica.alter.log.dirs.io.max.bytes.per.second`. Include the flag `--preserve-throttles` to avoid errors.

> - Kafka supports uprelication or dereplication through partition reassignments. Redpanda currently doesn't support this.

Reviewer: Are `uprelication` and `dereplication` supposed to be `upreplication` and `deduplication`?

Reviewer 2: Those terms are correct.
`upreplication` refers to increasing the replication factor on a topic.
`dereplication` refers to decreasing the replication factor on a topic.

However, from what I've seen, those terms are not used a **ton** in the Kafka world so we could change it.
```suggestion
- Kafka supports increasing and decreasing the topic replication factor through partition reassignments. Redpanda currently doesn't support this.
```

> - In a partition reassignment, users must provide the broker ID for each replica. Kafka validates the broker ID for any new replica (that wasn't in the previous replica set) against the list of alive brokers. Redpanda validates all replicas against the list of alive brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In a partition reassignment, users must provide the broker ID for each replica. Kafka validates the broker ID for any new replica that wasn't in the previous replica set against the list of alive brokers. Redpanda validates all replicas against the list of alive brokers.
```

> - Redpanda supports shard-level partition assignments. Therefore, when resolving a partition reassignment, Redpanda automatically determines the shard placements. If you want a topic-partition on a specific shard, you must use the Admin API.

Reviewer: Add sentence that `Kafka doesn't support shard-level partition assignments.`

> - Redpanda supports shard-level partition assignments. Therefore, when resolving a partition reassignment, Redpanda automatically determines the shard placements. If you want a topic-partition on a specific shard, you must use the Admin API.

Reviewer: The `partitions` mentioned in this section are all `topic-partitions`? If yes:

```suggestion
- Redpanda supports shard-level partition assignments. Therefore, when resolving a partition reassignment, Redpanda automatically determines the shard placements. If you want a partition on a specific shard, you must use the [Admin API](#assign-partitions-with-admin-api).
```

Reviewer 2: Correct, they are all `topic-partitions`.

> 

Reviewer 2: An additional bullet point for this section.

```
- In Kafka, attempts to add partitions to a topic when there are in-progress reassignments for the topic result in a `reassignment_in_progress` error. Redpanda will successfully add partitions to the topic.
```

> - When there are two identical partition reassignment requests, Redpanda rejects one with the error `no_reassignment_in_progress`.

Reviewer: What does Kafka do?

Reviewer 2: TODO for me.

Reviewer 2: Confirmed that Kafka will cancel the first request in favor of the second. Technical details [here](https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/issues/8697#issuecomment-1430098163)

```suggestion
When there are two identical partition reassignment requests, Kafka will cancel the first one without returning an error code to the user. Redpanda rejects one with `unknown_server_error`.
```

   
  ```json
  {
    "version": 1,
    "partitions": [
      {
        "topic": "foo",
        "partition": 1,
        "replicas": [
          3,
          1,
          2
        ]
      },
      {
        "topic": "foo",
        "partition": 2,
        "replicas": [
          2,
          1,
          3
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
  ```

4. Execute partition reassignments with the `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` script. This example uses `example.json` as the name of the JSON file:

  ```bash
  kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --execute
  Current partition replica assignment

  {"version":1,"partitions":[{"topic":"foo","partition":1,"replicas":[1,2,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]},{"topic":"foo","partition":2,"replicas":[3,1,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]}]}

  Save this to use as the --reassignment-json-file option during rollback
  Successfully started partition reassignments for foo-1,foo-2
  ```

> 1. Verify that the reassignment is complete with the flag `--preserve-throttles`: 

Reviewer 3: This is a little confusing.  the --verify flag is the main thing here that causes the script to verify placement. , --preserve-throttles is secondary.

Reviewer 2: Fair point. What I meant here is that
"we verify with the flags `--verify --preserve-throttles`"

Author: I've updated this.

  ```bash
  kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --verify --preserve-throttles
  Status of partition reassignment:
  Reassignment of partition foo-1 is complete.
  Reassignment of partition foo-2 is complete.
  ```

  Alternatively, run `rpk` again to show your reassigned replica sets:

  ```bash
  rpk topic describe foo -p
  PARTITION  LEADER  EPOCH  REPLICAS  LOG-START-OFFSET  HIGH-WATERMARK
  0          3       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  1          2       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  2          2       1      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  ```  

> 

Reviewer 2: I forgot to include the example to cancel a reassignment

6. You may also cancel an in-progress reassignment with the flags `--cancel --preserve-throttles`:
```
kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --cancel --preserve-throttles
Successfully cancelled partition reassignments for: foo-1,foo-2
```

### Differences in partition balancing between Redpanda and Kafka

> - Kafka's `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` script attempts to use throttle configurations that Redpanda does not support, such as `replica.alter.log.dirs.io.max.bytes.per.second`. Include the flags `--verify --preserve-throttles` to avoid errors.

Reviewer 3: @NyaliaLui @micheleRP  in this case I think '--preserve-throttles' IS the point and would be needed with other commands, or is it only 'verify' @NyaliaLui ?  In this instance should we just say 'use --preserve-throttles' with some commands, with verify, or what?  It seems we don't need it with '--execute'.  Minor nit.

Author: > @NyaliaLui @micheleRP in this case I think '--preserve-throttles' IS the point and would be needed with other commands, or is it only 'verify' @NyaliaLui ? In this instance should we just say 'use --preserve-throttles' with some commands, with verify, or what? It seems we don't need it with '--execute'. Minor nit.

Thanks @mattschumpert. @NyaliaLui please confirm exactly how we should phrase this item, and then I'll merge!

Reviewer 2: The statement is accurate.
`--preserve-throttles` is needed for `--verify` and `--cancel`, not for `--execute`.

Reviewer 2: > @NyaliaLui @micheleRP in this case I think '--preserve-throttles' IS the point and would be needed with other commands, or is it only 'verify' @NyaliaLui ? In this instance should we just say 'use --preserve-throttles' with some commands, with verify, or what? It seems we don't need it with '--execute'. Minor nit.

The current line is accurate.
We need `--preserve-throttles` with `--cancel` and `--verify`, not for `--execute`.

> - Kafka comes with a shell script to issue partition reassignments: `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh`. This script attempts to use throttle configurations that Redpanda does not support, such as `replica.alter.log.dirs.io.max.bytes.per.second`. Include the flag `--preserve-throttles` to avoid errors.

Reviewer 3: The first sentence is kind of obvious considering all the instructions above use the .sh script

- Kafka supports increasing and decreasing the topic replication factor through partition reassignments. Redpanda currently doesn't support this.

- In a partition reassignment, you must provide the broker ID for each replica. Kafka validates the broker ID for any new replica that wasn't in the previous replica set against the list of alive brokers. Redpanda validates all replicas against the list of alive brokers.

- When there are two identical partition reassignment requests, Kafka cancels the first one without returning an error code, while Redpanda rejects one with `unknown_server_error`.

- In Kafka, attempts to add partitions to a topic during in-progress reassignments result in a `reassignment_in_progress` error, while Redpanda successfully adds partitions to the topic.

- Kafka doesn't support shard-level partition assignments, but Redpanda does. When resolving a partition reassignment, Redpanda automatically determines the shard placements. If you want a partition on a specific shard, you must assign partitions with the Admin API. 

### Assign partitions with Admin API

You can manually assign partitions at topic creation with the Admin API: 

```bash

> kafka-topics.sh --create --bootstrap-server 127.0.0.1:9092 --topic custom-assignment --replica-assignment 0:1:2,0:1:2,0:1:2 

Reviewer 3: @micheleRP   @graphcareful  IIUC this isn't really 'using the admin API' from a user perspective. It's using the kafka-topics.sh script that comes with your Kafka client.  The whole point is that this is a standard kafka client workflow and not a Redpanda specific thing. 

I think we are just saying you can create custom partition assignments at topic creation using standard kafka client tools, right?

Author: Thanks @mattschumpert. I changed the heading to "Assign partitions at topic creation": https://deploy-preview-1212--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/beta/manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-balancing/#assign-partitions-with-admin-api

Reviewer 4: Colloquially I've heard people use the term "Kafka Admin API" when they're referring to using a Kafka client for anything other then producing or consuming.

Reviewer 3: True, but because we have the Redpanda Admin API which is wholly different and supports different things we should be careful mentioning 'admin API'.
